Integration notebook: live chunks, pipe, and cleanups (#606)
AlexsLemonade/training-modules: scRNA-seq-advanced/03-dataset_integration.Rmd

The particular libraries we'll integrate come from two rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) patients, with two samples from each of two patients, all sequenced with 10Xv3 technology.
Each library is from a separate biological sample.

We'll be integrating these samples with two different tools, [`fastMNN`](http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/batchelor.html) ([Haghverdi _et al._ (2018)](https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.4091)) and [`harmony`](https://portals.broadinstitute.org/harmony/) ([Korsunsky _et al._ (2019)](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0619-0)). 

> Integration corrects for batch effects that arise from different library preparations, genetic backgrounds, and other sample-specific factors, so that datasets can be jointly analyzed at the cell-level. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Integration corrects for batch effects that arise from different library preparations, genetic backgrounds, and other sample-specific factors, so that datasets can be jointly analyzed at the cell level. 
```

We can use the `dir()` function to list all contents of a given directory, for example to see all the files in our `input_dir`:

```{r input dir, live = TRUE}
dir(input_dir)
```

We want to read in just four of these files, as listed previously.

> To read in these files, we could use `readr::read_rds()` function (or the base R `readRDS()`) four times, once for each of the files. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To read in these files, we could use the `readr::read_rds()` function (or the base R `readRDS()`) four times, once for each of the files. 
```

Let's see a very simple example in action by quickly taking the square root of a vector of values:

```{r map example, live = TRUE}

# Define a vector of squares
squares <- c(4, 9, 16)

# get the square root of each number without purrr
sqrt(squares[1])
sqrt(squares[2])
sqrt(squares[3])

> # The `purrr:map()` function always returns a list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# The `purrr::map()` function always returns a list
```

Let's see a very simple example in action by quickly taking the square root of a vector of values:

> ```{r map_example, life = TRUE}

Reviewer: While I appreciate the sentiment...
````suggestion
```{r map_example, live = TRUE}
````

The output from running `purr::map()` is always a list (but note that there are other `purrr::map()` relatives which return other object types, as you can read about in [the `purrr::map()` documentation](https://purrr.tidyverse.org/reference/index.html)).

We'll note that, in this case, it's possible to simply run `sqrt()` directly on the `squares` vector itself since this function is already vectorized, but not all functions behave this way.

> ```{r quick_squares}

Reviewer: We have not been doing space-free names in other notebooks (at least not in this module), so for consistency I wouldn't make this change.

Author: I'll revert throughout.

sqrt(squares)
```

> More involved scenarios as we'll see shortly will necessitate the use of `map()`, in particular when the input is a list itself.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
More involved scenarios, as we'll see shortly, will necessitate the use of `map()`, in particular when the input is a list itself.
```

sce_paths <- file.path(input_dir, 
                       glue::glue("{sample_names}.rds")
)
```

```{r print sce paths, live = TRUE}
# Print the sce_paths vector
sce_paths
```

We can now read these files in and create a list of four SCE objects.

> Since `readr::read_rds()` can only operate on one input at a time (unlike `sqrt()` which can operate across a vector), we'll need to use `purrr::map()` to run in simultaneously on all input file paths.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since `readr::read_rds()` can only operate on one input (unlike `sqrt()` which can operate across a vector), we can use `purrr::map()` to read in all input file paths.
```
Technically it's still happening one by one and not simultaneously, so I did some small rewording to make that clear, we aren't running multiple things at once, we are reading all the files in, one by one, but doing it with one line of code.

Author: Maybe I'll add back in "in one command" instead of simultaneously (which makes sense!)

1. We should be able to trace sample-specific information back to the originating sample, including...
    - Cell-level information: Which sample is each cell from? 

>     - Library-specific feature statistics, e.g. gene-level statistics for a given library found in `rowData`.

Reviewer: Channeling an inner JT
```suggestion
    - Library-specific feature statistics, e.g., gene-level statistics for a given library found in `rowData`.
```

The best way to do this is simply to add a `colData` column with the sample information, so that we can know which sample each row came from.

> In addition, we want to pay some attention to the SCE object's column names (the cell IDs), which must remain unique after merging since duplicate IDs will cause an R error.

Reviewer: We have been pretty consistently using lower case "id"; let's stick with that.

One way to ensure that cell ids remain unique even after merging is to actually modify them by _prepending_ the relevant sample name. 
For example, consider these barcodes for the `SCPCL000479` sample:

```{r barcodes, live = TRUE}
# Look at the column names for the `SCPCL000479` sample, for example

> colnames(sce_list$SCPCL000479) |>

Reviewer 2: I'm 50/50 on this and the next chunk being live. You are just printing out an output and the scpca ids can be annoying and easy to mess up if you aren't used to the formatting.

> ```{r compare rowdata}

Reviewer 2: what if this chunk was live instead of the previous two?

# Use `purrr::map()` to quickly extract rowData column names for all SCEs
purrr::map(sce_list,
           \(x) colnames(rowData(x)))
```

#### Ensuring that only shared genes are used

The next step in ensuring SCE compatibility is to make sure they all contain the same genes, which are stored as the SCE object's row names (these names are also found the `rowData` slot's row names). 

> Here, those gene ids are unique Ensembl gene ids .

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here, those gene ids are unique Ensembl gene ids.
```

We can use some `purrr` magic to quickly find the set of shared genes among our samples:

```{r shared genes, live = TRUE}
# Define vector of shared genes
shared_genes <- sce_list |>
  # get rownames (genes) for each SCE in sce_list
  purrr::map(rownames) |>
  # reduce to the _intersection_ among lists
  purrr::reduce(intersect)
```

```{r print shared genes, live = TRUE}
# Use head to look at the vector of shared genes:
head(shared_genes)
```

In this case, we happen to know that all SCE objects we're working with already contained the same genes. 
We do a quick-and-dirty check for this by looking at the number of rows across SCE objects, and we'll see that they are all the same:

```{r check shared genes, live = TRUE}
# The number of genes in an SCE corresponds to its number of rows:
sce_list |>
  purrr::map(nrow)
```

So, for our data, we will not have to subset to shared genes since they are already shared!
 
#### Ensuring matching columns in `colData`

Finally, we'll need to have the same column names across all SCE `colData` tables, so let's look at all those column names.
We can use similar syntax here to what we used to look at all the `rowData` column names.

> ```{r compare coldata, live = TRUE}

Reviewer 2: If you take my earlier suggestion about making the earlier `purrr::map` for the rowData to be live, you could then make this not live.

```{r shared_genes, live = TRUE}
# Define vector of shared genes
shared_genes <- sce_list |>
  # get rownames (genes) for each SCE in sce_list
  purrr::map(rownames) |>
  # reduce to the _intersection_ among lists
  purrr::reduce(intersect)
```

```{r print_shared_genes, live = TRUE}
# Use head to look at the vector of shared genes:
head(shared_genes)
```

In this case, we happen to know that all SCE objects we're working with already contained the same genes. 
We do a quick-and-dirty check for this by looking at the number of rows across SCE objects, and we'll see that they are all the same:

```{r check_shared_genes, live = TRUE}
# The number of genes in an SCE corresponds to its number of rows:
sce_list |>
  purrr::map(nrow)
```

So, for our data, we will not have to subset to shared genes since they are already shared!
 
#### Ensuring matching columns in `colData`

Finally, we'll need to have the same column names across all SCE `colData` tables, so let's look at all those column names.
We can use similar syntax here to what we used to look at all the `rowData` column names.

```{r compare_coldata, live = TRUE}
purrr::map(sce_list,

>            ~colnames(colData(.)))

Reviewer: If we want to be consistent about `purrr` syntax between notebooks: (we would need to change the rowData chunk too).

```suggestion
           \(x) colnames(colData(x)) )
```

We'll write a _custom function_ (seen in the chunk below) tailored to our wrangling steps that prepares a single SCE object for merging.
We'll then use our new `purrr::map()` programming skills to run this function over the `sce_list`.
This will give us a new list of formatted SCEs that we can proceed to merge.

> It's important to remember that the `format_sce()` function written below is not a function for general use - it's been precisely written to match the processing we need to do for _these_ SCEs, and different SCEs in the wild will require different types of processing.

Reviewer: I did it elsewhere, so I did it here too. This is an en-dash to em-dash change. You can't see it, but it is there. 

```suggestion
It's important to remember that the `format_sce()` function written below is not a function for general use – it's been precisely written to match the processing we need to do for _these_ SCEs, and different SCEs in the wild will require different types of processing.
```

> ```{r format_sce function, live = TRUE}

Reviewer 2: I would not make this live, this seems like a lot!

Author: Oh boy this was an ACCIDENT for sure..........................

  # Name of the function to run
  format_sce
)
```

```{r print_sce_list_formatted, live = TRUE}

> # Print resulting list

Reviewer: These could remain a single chunk.

sce_list_formatted
```

(Psst, like `purrr` and want to dive deeper? Check out [the `purrr::imap()` function](https://purrr.tidyverse.org/reference/imap.html)!)

At long last, we are ready to merge the SCEs, which we'll do using the R function `cbind()`.
The `cbind()` function is often used to combine data frames or matrices by column, i.e. "stack" them next to each other.
The same principle applies here, but when run on SCE objects, `cbind()` will create a new SCE object by combining `counts` and `logcounts` matrices by column.
Following that structure, other SCE slots (`colData`, `rowData`, reduced dimensions, and other metadata) are combined appropriately.

Since we need to apply `cbind()` to a _list_ of objects, we need to use some slightly-gnarly syntax: We'll use the function `do.call()`, which allows the `cbind()` input to be a list of objects to combine.

```{r merges_sces, live = TRUE}
# Merge SCE objects 
merged_sce <- do.call(cbind, sce_list_formatted)
```

```{r print_merged_sce, live = TRUE}

> # Print the merged_sce object

Reviewer: Same here... no need to split these chunks, I don't think, as only one has output. You might want to do it live, but I don't think it needs to be done in the published notebook.

You'll notice that the merged SCE object object already contains PCA and UMAP reduced dimensions, which were calculated during our pre-processing:

```{r merged_sce_reddim, live = TRUE}
# Print the reducedDimNames of the merged_sce
reducedDimNames(merged_sce)
```

These represent the original dimension reductions that were performed on _each individual SCE_ before merging, but we actually need to calculate PCA (and UMAP for visualization) from the merged object directly.

Why can't we use the sample-specific PCA and UMAP matrices? 
Part of these calculations themselves involves scaling the raw data to center the mean.
When samples are separately centered but plotting together, you will see samples "overlapping" in space, but this placement is actually just an artifact of the individual centering.
In addition, the mathematical relationship between the original expression data and reduced dimension version of that data will differ across samples, meaning we can't interpret them all together.
To see how this looks, let's look at the UMAP when calculated from individual samples:

> ```{r individual_UMAPs}

Reviewer: I think I might reverse approach you took here. I'd want to show the UMAP plot live the first time, and then maybe not show every followup live, as they get repetitive.

Author: This is better!!

First, as usual, we'll determine the high-variance genes to use for PCA from the `merged_sce` object.
For this, we'll need to provide the argument `block = merged_sce$sample` when modeling gene variance, which tells `scran::modelGeneVar()` to first model variance separately for each batch and then combine those modeling statistics.

```{r calc_merged_hv_genes}
# Specify the number of genes to identify
num_genes <- 2000

# Calculate variation for each gene
gene_variance <- scran::modelGeneVar(merged_sce,
                                     # specify the grouping column:
                                     block = merged_sce$sample)

> # Cet the top `num_genes` high-variance genes to use for dimension reduction

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Get the top `num_genes` high-variance genes to use for dimension reduction
```

### Integration with `fastMNN`

> Finally, we're ready to integrate.

Reviewer: I miss the enthusiasm

To start, we'll use the `fastMNN` approach from the Bioconductor [`batchelor` package](http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/3.16/bioc/html/batchelor.html).

`fastMNN` takes as input the `merged_sce` object to integrate, and the first step it performs is actually to run `batchelor::multiBatchPCA()` on that SCE.
It then uses that batch-weighted PCA matrix to perform the actual batch correction.
The `batch` argument is used to specify the different groupings within the `merged_sce` (i.e. the original sample that each cell belongs to), and the `subset.row` argument can optionally be used to provide a vector of high-variance genes that should be considered for this PCA calculation.
`fastMNN` will return an SCE object that contains a batch-corrected PCA.
Let's run it and save the result to a variable called `integrated_sce`.

> ```{r run_fastmnn, live = TRUE}
> integrated_sce <- batchelor::fastMNN(
>   # the merged SCE object

Reviewer: Just a note that without an initial comment, the `# the merged SCE object` will be the first comment in the enlivened chunk, which may look odd, so I suggest adding one:
````suggestion
```{r run_fastmnn, live = TRUE}
# integrate with fastMNN
integrated_sce <- batchelor::fastMNN(
  # the merged SCE object
````

Recall from earlier that we conveniently have cell type annotations in our SCEs, so we can explore those here!
Let's take a quick detour to see what kinds of cell types are in this data by making a barplot of the cell types across samples:

> ```{r explore_celltypes, live = TRUE}

Reviewer: I might not do this live. I don't think we want people to have to reload ggplot syntax and options at this moment in the course.

However, it's a bit challenging to see all the points given the amount of overlap in the plot.
One way we can see all the points a bit better is to facet the plot by sample, using `facet_wrap()` from the `ggplot2` package (which we can do because `scater::plotReducedDim()` returns a `ggplot2` object):

```{r plot fastmnn umap celltypes faceted}
scater::plotReducedDim(merged_sce,
                       dimred = "fastmnn_UMAP",
                       colour_by = "celltype_broad",
                       point_size = 0.5,
                       point_alpha = 0.2,
                       # Allow for faceting by a variable using `other_fields`:
                       other_fields = "sample") +
  guides(colour = guide_legend(override.aes = list(size = 3, alpha = 1))) +
  ggtitle("UMAP after integration with fastMNN") +
  # Facet by sample
  facet_wrap(vars(sample)) +
  # Use a theme with background grid to more easily compare panel coordinates
  theme_bw() 
```

> What trends do you observe between Tumor and healthy tissues among these integrated samples?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What trends do you observe between tumor and healthy tissues among these integrated samples?
```
